<p class="lead">One of the biggest challenges in flute design and construction is the accurate placement of each tonehole to produce the desired notes and scale. The <em>Fulani Flute</em> (or <em>tambin</em>), a beautiful and deceptively complex flute found in parts of West Africa, is no exception.</p>

Master craftsmen in West Africa, however, accomplish this feat with surprising accuracy and consistency, without the aid of advanced measurement tools, tuners, or mathematics. Skilled artisans, they rely heavily on intuition, and often utilize nothing but their own fingers as “measuring sticks” — without paper and pen, the relationships of the instrument to their own arms and fingers are memorized, so that specific ratios can be reproduced again in future efforts. Having honed their skills with a lifetime of musical immersion, they fine-tune the pitch of their instruments by ear until the flute can sing back to them the very songs they grew up with.

The cumulative knowledge acquired by the traditional flutemaker through a lifetime of experimentation and training is impressive. Equally as fascinating, though, is how the simple, raw materials from which this ancient woodwind is built seem to belie the underlying complexity of the physics behind it. Fashioned from a woody vine found along the banks of the Niger River, the _tambin_ features just three holes, and an embouchure sculpted from black beeswax. Adornment with leather, rope, and cowrie shells completes the aesthetic of an object which, born of the earth, carries a significance beyond its primary function. No child’s toy, in the skilled hands of the _fula-fola_ these enchanting flutes produce 2½ octaves via four distinct registers, and are capable of the finest subtleties of musical expression. That the living breath of the player awakens elements of wood and earth to resonate into sacred song gives the flutes a place in the realm of the mystical — both for those who play it, and for those who are transported by its sounds.

<!-- <p>need to bridge...how do we move from simple & mystical to complex math and science?</p> -->

Over the [course of many trips to Guinea, West Africa][1], I had the opportunity to study with a master craftsman who was renowned throughout the region for his flute-making. As an apprentice, I learned to make (and play) my own Fulani flutes.

<!-- [say more about this experience and bridge into next section] ...-->

Here in the States, I refined my process to make a flute that was more durable — it needed to survive the extreme cold of New England winters — with materials and tools that were available to me locally. Necessity, as well as my own innate curiosity, drove me to veer from the methods and materials of traditional West African flute-building, and to find out what was possible. Since new materials required different methods of determining tonehole placement, I dug into the available literature on the science of woodwind instrument building.

For three years I absorbed every bit of information I could find on the subject. Combining this with my experiences in West Africa and a working knowledge of how these flutes were built, I produced dozens of prototypes in my workshop in northern New Hampshire. Numerous failed attempts preceded even the first remotely playable flute. A sad-looking pile of discarded flutes accumulated beneath my workbench — but every failed attempt revealed critical new information that spurred me onwards to try again, even if only to make new mistakes. In this manner, the _tambin_ slowly began to reveal its secrets — not all at once, and not even every time — but the flutes I was now producing had begun to take on a character that were somehow richer, and assuredly more enjoyable to play. With patience, I found that subtle changes made big differences. I strove to perfect the shape, size, and angles of the embouchure. Toneholes grew larger and then smaller again on subsequent flutes, as I experimented with finding just the right ratios.

Unbeknownst to me, through repeated trial and error, experimentation and failure, I had been moving through a passage of initiation similar to that which brings forth a traditional flute-maker in West Africa. I was no longer _copying_ a model of a flute, as I once had as an apprentice in our hot, dusty workshop in Conakry…but learning to _create_ one. In the process, I discovered something else quite unexpected: _how to learn_. It was the most important secret that the flute had revealed to me.

<p class="divider"><span class="flower db-deco"></span></p>

What follows is a series of tools and charts I’ve developed over the course of my flute-making journey, to aid in the calculation of tonehole placement for a 3-hole Fulani Flute made from uniform diameter tube. While this “electronic worksheet” is the result of honing my process with many dozens of flutes, the ideas (and mathematic equations) are based largely on the formulas and principles outlined in [Bart Hopkin’s _Air Columns and Toneholes: Principles for Wind Instrument Design_][2] — a fabulous resource for aspiring flutemakers and enthusiasts alike. That resource has proven to be invaluable to me numerous times as I searched for answers as to why a particular flute was slightly off, or while continuously striving to improve upon a prior prototype. I share this tool in the hopes that it may be of some benefit (or at least some interest) to someone else out there embarking on a similar path…

###Variables

In order to properly calculate the placement of toneholes on a flute, several variables come into play. They are:


[1]:http://www.davekobrenski.com/djoliba-crossing/
[2]:http://windworld.com/products-page/books-cds/air-columns-and-toneholes-principles-for-wind-instrument-design/